so 3D avatars are incredibly trendy and
if you know me I'm all about creating
sty character illustrations but I've
never really brought too much sculpting
to the channel but today is going to be
my first episode in a series of videos
where together we're going to transform
the starting Cube into a cute sculpted
character illustration but as always my
name is Ken and if you're ready to jump
in with me today grab yourself a nice
cup of tea coffee hot chocolate whatever
you're into and let's get into it
all right welcome back everybody hope
everybody's keeping well and hope you're
feeling good nice and hyped and ready to
jump in with me today the focus of this
tutorial is going to be turning our
default Cube into a nice sculpted
character stylized head and then some
other videos down the line we're going
to be taking a look at how to perhaps
create some nice stylized character hair
bit of texture painting and also we'll
finish up with some compositing and
lighting and rendering but as's a couple
of notes before we jump in make sure you
keep an eye down here that's going to
show you my mouse clicks and my keyboard
inputs and it's probably worth having at
least blender 3.3 installed just to be
nice and up to date to make sure you
have all the tools and even though this
is cated to beginners it's probably
worth just having a general basic
understanding of blenders blender
interface in addition to just knowing
how to orbit in the viewport just so you
don't get lost along the way but
nonetheless I will try my best to keep
you in the loop so do not worry I'm sure
you will have a good time all the same
so let's start by getting rid of some of
these things we're not going to use the
light not going to use the camera we're
going to get rid of the default timeline
and we're going to hide the gizmos so
now we've got this nice big and
beautiful minimal viewport to work
with so in order to start sculpting with
our default Cube here then we are going
to need more geometry and we can create
that nice and simply by going into our
modifiers and added in a subdivision
surface modifier to start this off I am
just going to use a subdivision level of
two so that we can go ahead and apply
that and as we go along we will
increment this and add more subdivisions
to have a nice smooth finish as we go
along but I think this will do just to
block out the general shape of the head
so with that done let's go ahead and
jump now into our sculpt mode now you
may or may not be familiar with the
sculpt tools already but what I gen to
what I generally recommend just in case
is by dragging out this section once and
twice you're going to have a nice little
layout here with all the labels next to
the individual tools so that way you can
learn the general names and their
function and to start this off we are
just going to begin by stretching out
the general shape bar head here to begin
the general Shape Up and for that I'm
going to be using the grab tool here and
as we go along you want to make sure
that you come to here to enable xais
mirroring that's just going to make sure
that anything we do on one side it's
automatically going to occur in the
other and you can see right now we've
got a 3D cursor here and when we click
and drag we are making changes to our
mesh here right now the 3D cursor is far
too small and we're making these little
spikes on our mesh so if you're trying
to create something like Darth Maul
probably pretty good but in our case not
so good so I'm going to undo that and
what we're going to do we can either
come into our radius here and increase
the size of our cursor or what you're
probably going to want to get used to
doing is pressing f as you go along and
if we move our cursor left and right
like this we can change the general
radius and right now I want it to be
quite large to start blocking this out
so something like that maybe and from
there let's go ahead and in front view
I'm going to start dragging down the
front of the head and this is just going
to be where the chin will be and I want
the head top of the head to come up a
little larger because I am going for a
stylized character approach which is
always nice because you're not really
working with realistic proportions so
nothing needs to be too exact with this
and just remember we are working in 3D
so you are going to need to jump into
different
views to start stretching out your
character and making sure he looks good
from all angles and what I'm generally
looking for here is a nice jawline that
comes down and then it's going to come
up to meet the back of the
skull so I want to bring up the back of
the head here to get this sort of shape
going on just adjusting my cursor with f
as I go
along until I get this sort of shape I
like and just like I said earlier make
sure you are rotating and checking this
from all different angles now in top
view maybe something like that I do want
to bring the jaw out and make it a
little bit more defined but before we do
that it's probably worth now adding in
some extra geometry and like I said
earlier we can go ahead and do that with
another subdivision modifier in this
case I think I'm going to go for three
this part is generally just preference
dep depending on how much geometry you
want but another three should be fine so
we now have five in total and we're
going to continue sculpting until we get
a general shape that we like perhaps
I'll bring the jaw out a bit more here
make it a little bit more
defined but I may or may not speed
through this section A little bit but
feel free to take your time with
this till you achieve a general look
that you like and don't be too fusty
with this end of the day we're still
learning and nothing is going to be
perfect maybe something like that is
looking pretty cute me make the chin a
little bit
pointier and maybe I'll smooth this out
slightly oh and that's probably
something I should explain so during
your time sculpting in Blender at any
point in time you can hold shift and
click
to begin smoothing over different
sections using the smooth tool and
that's just going to nicely smooth over
different
sections I'm just clicking around a
little bit here just to smooth the chin
line out a bit more or the jawline
rather but I think for the purposes of
this tutorial something like that should
look pretty
good and I'm also while I'm here
actually I'm going to come into my drop
down up here and I'm going to switch to
a matte cap this is just preference once
again but in here I like to use this red
one cuz I think it looks pretty nice
when you sculp
in now let's look at blocking up some of
the other features such as the neck and
the ears and to do that let's firstly go
ahead and jump back into object mode
here and I'm just going to go ahead and
I want to bring my head
up maybe to around there and we're just
going to go ahead and do a little bit of
box modeling to get the basic shapes
that we're looking for here and I'm
going to start with the neck so let's go
ahead do shift a and we can add in a
nice New Cube and I'm going to use a
subdivision surface modifier to start
smoothing this over perhaps give it
three subdivisions and I'm going to
leave the subdivision modifier active at
the moment then we can shrink this down
with
s and then I'm going to jump in side
view and let's bring our head forward a
little bit with g y to lock that to the
y- AIS and all I'm looking to do is to
have a nice neck that comes up like this
so so tab into edit mode on our Cube
here three to select faces and then
clicking on this top face inside view
we're going to exw this up so it's a
nicely curved shape and what I like to
do in these sort of circumstances is
rather than just extruding with E and
moveing and adjus in you can actually
hold control and right click to keep
extruding in different directions like
this obviously that neck's a bit large
and I think I'm going to scale this down
slightly too actually and then back in
edit mode let's hold control right click
right click and then we can just adjust
as we need something like that I think
we'll do for now and we can make some
fine adjustments and I'm going to toggle
x-ray view here make sure I press one to
select vertices and I'm just going to
highlight these and I'm want to adjust
this to get a bit more of a curved neck
shape and we flatten out these sections
with controlr to add in some Loop Cuts
drag them down some whoops undo that and
bring that here something like that and
I'm just looking for a general curve
shape to block this out back into object
mode disable x-ray
view okay that looks pretty good still a
little bit too thick so I'm going to go
into front view T back into the edit
mode then select faces we can select
this entire Loop here by holding Al and
selecting an edge and with that I'm just
going to scale this down a little bit to
give a little bit more of a skinny neck
look to suit this stylized character
maybe something like that and you can
keep readjusting this as much as you
like you know I'm like I'm pretty fussy
with these things so you know I can
spend far too much time here but I think
something like that should do the job
perfect okay so now let's block out some
ears too and we're going to use pretty
much the same method but let's go ahead
and move our 3D curs up to here first
with shift s cursor to the selected
object shift a add the cube scale this
down bring this
out and then s and Y I think to make
this a little thinner and I'm not going
for realistic ears here I am keeping
this nice and stylized so we're going to
subdivide this again three subdivisions
and then actually let's shade smooth
everything too so I'm going to highlight
everything right click shade smooth and
then let's go ahead and just scale up
our here to start and in my right side
view i' like to line mine generally up
with the jaw section here and from above
I like to tilt them out to have it
something like that for
now and then let's go ahead and mirror
this across to the other side by adding
another modifier for our mirror and the
object is going to be the head itself
and so if I jump to front view to have a
little look here perhaps bring these
down
slightly okay how is this looking I
think that's looking pretty good as far
as a general blockout goes he is going
to have nice big ears because I like
that look that's just me but as I said
feel free to adjust this and make this
your
own at this point in time we're good now
to start remeshing these to make them
one uniform object so we can start doing
some sculpted so in order to do that we
need these to be uh me we need this to
be an actual mesh right now it's
technically just a preview because under
the hood you can see that we still got
the square look and in order to do that
all we need to do is to apply this here
and what I normally recommend as well at
this point in time because we are about
to remesh and do some heavier sculpting
it's a good option to save up and I
generally like to keep backups of my my
different stages too so perhaps we'll
make a duplicate with this with shift d
and then you can press M make a new
collection I'm just going to call this
back
up and then you can also disable this in
here to go ahead and make sure it's
disabled to the extent that it's not
affecting your performance in in any way
and now let's go ahead and join up these
objects to do some remeshing so
initially to do make these one single
object click on the neck then shift
click on the head and we can either
press contrl J or right click and just
click join right here and now they are
one object but technically they are
still separate because if I use l to
select them you can see that they are
still selectable as independent objects
so what we need to do at this point is
to jump back into sculp mode and what
we're going to do is utilize this remesh
option up here now this is something you
do need to be careful with because if
you go too low with your number your
you're essentially going to crash your
computer or crash blender and uh so take
your time I tend to start with
0.05 and the smaller this number goes
the more vertices it's going to add to
your mesh to give you a higher dense
mesh is is generally the term and we can
Al also disable the face set and that's
going to remove this color here to
signify Which object is which so let's
go ahead remesh I'm going to start with
0.05 take away my faet and click remesh
so just like that you can now see this
is one uniform mesh although generally
for me this isn't enough detail so I'm
going to undo and then just slowly
increment so perhaps we'll do
0.0 uh 2 now and see what sort of
density we have there we go that looks
pretty good to me I'm pretty happy with
that and if you do care about exact
numbers you can come into here and turn
on statistics I'm actually going to turn
off text info and you can see we're now
working with 50,000 faces on our shape
here but that's great now that's plenty
to start sculpting with and we can start
smoothing this over to make this look
nice and connected so let's go ahead and
do that now I'm going to hold shift and
just start smoothing this over little by
little to take your time with this and
adjust your cursor where you need it to
and I'm just going to make the
transition between the neck and the head
a little smoother just so we have this
nice nice finish to the back of the head
something like that and you can see
you've also got these lines here you can
also smooth smooth those over something
like that and I think that's looking
pretty good guys this is this is turning
out quite well I've recorded this about
three
times Well I like this one it's looking
good and if you're still with me right
now congratulations you doing really
well I'm just going to jump the side
view woo so that's looking nice and
smooth look at that head
beautiful right so now we need to do a
bit of sculpting on the ears I think so
let's go ahead and jump back into object
mode and of course we do have two ears
right now because of the mirror modifier
but when you sculpt in uh with like
modifier is active it can uh affect the
performance so generally let's come down
to here and disable the mirror modifier
just for the time being and I'm going to
apply the subdivision so the miror of
modify is still here we've just disabled
it in in the viewboard for the time
being and what I want to do now is go
ahead and start sculpting a little bit
more shape oh and if you ever see this
popup here un uniform scale or
non-uniform scale come back in object
mode if I press n on my object here to
open up my end menu and in item you can
see these are all the different uh data
properties for this object and you
generally want all of these scale
variables when you sculpt in to be one
so you can just do that by by apply a
scale with CR a and then apply a scale
and that's going to nicely reset those
variables so that when when we so that
when we move and adjust and transform
this shape it's all nice and uniform
okay so let's press n to close that up
and now I'm going to jump back into
sculpt mode and I think all I'm going to
do for this initially is I want a bit
more of an indentation here and then
perhaps I'll adjust the overall shape of
the slightly but for most of this I'm
just going to be using the grab tool
again so we can press G or select it
over here then I'm going to press F to
increase the scale on this and let's
focus in on this oh a quick tip guys a
lot of people don't know about this but
you can actually hold alt and middle
Mouse click on any section to jump to it
I thought that's uh that's a very handy
tip that I don't see a lot of people
utilizing but at this point if I stop
rambling we're just going to start
pulling the ear in like this to give him
a little bit of an
indentation I'm using a mouse and
keyboard here by the way normally I'd
use a display tablet or a t in general
but I just wanted this tutorial to be a
little bit more accessible for everybody
and I just wanted everybody to see that
you can achieve pretty good results even
if you don't have all the tools right
let me jump into front view
here and I'm just going to make the
shape a little less perfectly round a
little bit more abnormal so it's not too
perfect something like that and now I
want to sub divide this a little bit
more maybe maybe give another two whoops
two and apply this and then I think
using the draw tool up here now the draw
tool if I shrink this down using F again
it's just going to let us extrude
different sections but with any sculp in
tool in blender you can actually hold
control and then that's going to invert
that Extrusion so instead of drawing
right now it's going to draw inwards so
you can see we're making little
indentations here and I'm going to draw
little bit of I don't know what it's
called you know that section of the ear
here and then I'm just going to smooth
it over don't know where it's called but
I just want to give a little bit of an
impression like there's something there
for that but I think for the purposes of
this tutorial that's a pretty cute
looking ear what do you
think right I'm pretty happy with that
so now we're going to go ahead and do
the same thing as we did before we're
looking to convert this to a mesh and
then remesh it along with the head so we
can nicely join everything up so back
into object mode Let's reenable the
mirror modifier so now we nicely have
two ears looking very cool and then we
can apply and then with the ears
selected shift click on the head control
J and then we're going to go back into
sculpt mode and then using the remesh
tool perhaps I'll increase this to
actually know what let's try 0.02 again
and see how it
looks okay that's not too bad it's
starting to get a little bit more
jaggedy around the edges here so I think
I'm going to undo and try 01 for
this yeah that looks pretty nice and
smooth and then just like we did before
make sure you have your x-axis mirroring
on so it affects both sides and I'm just
going to come in and start smoothing
this
over look at that beautiful transition
there I love it smooth it over smooth it
over cast and
over yeah you're going to have to put up
me singing for a little bit now while we
do
this right I think that's looking good
and don't forget you can adjust the size
of your curse as you go along to get
nicely into those little
crevices something like that and you can
see he does have this
overall um they you know when you're
remeshing sometimes you can't get this
these lines appearing but you know go
ahead and start smoothing them all over
again but I think this is looking pretty
nice turning up pretty good how are we
feeling I hope you all having a good
time oh do you know these ears are
[Music]
cute so once again a lot of this is
going to be subjective and down to the
style that you're looking to achieve but
in my case I'm just going to go ahead
and using the draw tool again I'm going
to shrink down my crysal a little bit
making sure that my x-axis mirin is on
and in front of you let's go ahead and
just start drawing in some my sockets so
you can hold control and then if I just
start clicking and just making a little
rotation with my cursor here and then
release in and go again to go even
deeper and you can make this as deep as
you need to fit your eyeballs you might
have big eyes you might have little eyes
but something like that I think no a
little bit more a little bit deeper
something like that I think we'll do for
the moment and then using our grab tool
again with G we can shape up the eyes a
little bit and I don't know why but I
like my guys with a little bit of
attitude so I tend to drop the eyes down
a little bit cuz I think there is
something cool and interesting about a
character that's got a bit of attitude
in his
eyes it's just a general style I've been
going with for a while now okay cool I
think something like that will do and as
we go along it's probably worth adding
in some eyeballs now because it just
makes it a little easier to visualize
what's going on so back into object mode
and we're going to move our 3D cursor
here to the I soet so we can hold shift
and right click right here and then
shift a and we're going to use a UV
sphere in this case I'm going to use S
to scale this down and I want to rotate
this 90° on the x axis so R to rotate X
to lock that to the x- axis then just
type 9 0 and now you can see the
circular part of of the UV sphere is
facing forward and that way it just
looks a bit more like an eyeball and
when you come to our shaders later you
can sort of use this as an indication of
where the poop is and such but that
looks pretty good to me and we're going
to want to bring this
forward and then just make sure
everything lines up nicely something
like that and just like with the ears
earlier in our modifiers we can add in a
mirror modifier boom and then we have
two eyeballs looking pretty cool with
some attitude so now I want to add a
nose so what I'm going to do is I want
to make sure the nose is perfectly
centered and we can do that by using
this center point on the head again so
shift s cursor 2 selected so let's do
shift a then and I'm just going to do
our nose with a nice Cube scaling this
down then gy to bring this out and what
I'm going to do here is just move this
into place so let's start subdividing
out the nose here and then I'm going to
tab into edit mode edit mode and using
control R let's add in a little bit of
shape to this whoops contr R
again and I'm just going to line my nose
up slightly like
this maybe make it a little bit
wider and as I said guys this is just
generally my style of character feel
free to do whatever you like but then we
can right click a shade smooth on this
and at this point in time I think that
looks pretty cool let's go ahead and
right click and convert this to a mesh
and I'm going to go ahead and combine
this with the head and then we're going
to do the same old as we did before
we're going to remesh this to make it
one uniform object so with this selected
shift click on the head contrl J into
sculp mode we're going to remesh using
the 0.01
again boom nicely one uniform shape and
we can go ahead and smooth this
over and take your time around the edges
here cuz I do want to keep a bit of a
nicely defined edge with it when it
comes to the
nose I think something like that looks
pretty cool and then let's use the grab
tool to shape this up just a little bit
more something like that I think that's
looking pretty cool and I think I'm
going
to give him a little bit more of a py
cheek
here looking pretty snazzy if I do say
so my s but right now he can't breathe
he needs some nostrils or at least if
that's the style you want to go for I'm
going to do this with the draw tool
again and then jump in into my bottom
view here let's go ahead and hold
control and do some nice circles for
nostrils I can
breathe something like that that's
looking pretty nice and then you can go
ahead and smooth this over here one I
think the smooth tool might be a little
bit strong here no that that should be
okay but at any point if you want to
reduce the strength or increase the
strength even of your tools you can
adjust it up here so it's uh right here
the smooth brush so I can turn the
strength of this down just to smooth it
a little more gently and not forgetting
to check this from different angles too
so I'm just going to jump into my side
view and I want to make sure this nose
looks nice and smooth depending on how
you want yours to
look now all it's left to do I think
with this is to go ahead and sculpt a
little mouth and in this case I don't do
a lot of detail on my stylized mouths I
just do generally just do like a little
line so for that I am actually going to
turn off my x-axis mirror in and we'll
see how well I do this cuz you know they
don't always turn out the same but I'm
going to start by using the draw sharp
tool which is pretty much the same as
the draw tool except it's going to draw
inwards by default and it's going to be
a little sharper too so what I tend to
do with this is to do a line and you can
also if you want to make sure this line
is nice and smooth you can actually go
into your stroke options up here and
enable stabilize stroke and that's going
to give you this nice smooth stroll
effect so let's go ahead and shrink down
the size of a cursa and it might
actually be worth increasing the size
not the size the strength of our brush
just just a little bit to 75 there I'm
just going to give him a little smile
ooh nice and cheeky that looks pretty
good and now I just want to make this a
little bit thinner and for that perhaps
we'll use the pinge tool increasing this
a little bit and you can go along your
mouth crease here to really get a nice
defined lip sort of thing I don't know
what you'd call call on a stylist
character cuz they don't really have
lips today I'm just smoothing this over
a little bit here how's that that looks
pretty cool right pretty
nifty okay I like it and I think that's
going to just about do it for today's
video I hope you enjoyed and in the next
episode of this we're going to be
looking at doing sty his hair and giving
our guy a little bit more expression
with some eyebrows and such so if you're
interested in that don't forget to hit
that subscribe button and hit the
notification Bell to be notified when
that comes out other than that the
soures for this as always will be over
on my patreon but I hope you very much
enjoyed my name has been Keelan I hope
you enjoy the rest of your day and I'll
catch you in the next one
[Music]
[Applause]